---
layout: talk
title:  "Flow, Flex, and Ship: The Daily Practice of Agile Engineering"
date:   2024-10-29 8:30:00
videoURI:
slidesURI: /slides/2024-10-agile
slideContentURI: ./slide-text/2024-10-agile
---

Talk for [UCTech 2024](http://uctech2024.ucdavis.edu).

The products we develop must keep pace with the frenetic speed of today's world. Whether we're responding to a zero-day threat in our dependency graph, fixing a bug, or releasing a new feature speed is the ultimate metric for success. Paradoxically building a sustainable culture of speed requires committing to work life balance for our team members and slowing down our output to focus on testing and automation. Much like building strength in our bodies daily effort is required to build agility in our teams. In this talk, we will explore how to cultivate and embrace the daily practice of agile engineering through the principles of “Flow, Flex, and Ship.”

“Flow” represents the state of optimal performance, where developers are fully immersed in their work, experiencing a sense of effortless progress. We will delve into techniques and strategies that enable teams to achieve and sustain this state of flow, fostering creativity, collaboration, and innovation. From creating well-defined goals and breaking tasks into manageable chunks to eliminating distractions and leveraging automation, we will uncover the secrets to unlocking the flow state in agile development.

“Flex” embodies the adaptability and resilience required to navigate the ever-changing landscape of software development. We will explore how to embrace the principles of flexibility, including continuous learning, feedback-driven iterations, and embracing change. By adopting flexible mindsets and practices, we can overcome challenges, respond to evolving user needs, and deliver high-quality software that stands the test of time.

“Ship” signifies the ultimate goal of agile development: delivering value to users. We will discuss the importance of frequent and incremental releases, empowering teams to ship software early and often. We will explore strategies for ensuring quality, such as automated testing, continuous integration, and continuous deployment. By making shipping a habitual part of the development process, we can foster a culture of accountability, speed, and customer satisfaction.

Through real-world examples, practical tips, and actionable insights, this talk will inspire and empower attendees to embrace the daily practice of agile development. By cultivating the principles of “Flow, Flex, and Ship,” teams can not only achieve short-term success but also build software systems that are maintainable, adaptable, and capable of withstanding the test of time.

Outcomes:

- Identify techniques to achieve and maintain a developer’s flow state for optimal performance and productivity.
- Learn strategies for frequent, incremental releases to deliver value and ensure continuous user feedback.
- Explore automated testing and CI/CD practices to maintain quality while increasing release frequency.
- Recognize the balance between rapid delivery and sustainable development for long-term team efficiency and well-being.
