---
layout: post
title: 'From two directions: 2019 Ember.js Roadmap'
description: >
  The Ember.js community is once again embarking on an open [Roadmap process](https://blog.emberjs.com/2019/05/20/ember-2019-roadmap-call-for-posts.html) and I'm excited to participate this year. I'd like to focus on two very different needs I see in our ecosystem today:
    1. Attracting new users to single page from classic apps.
    2. Flushing out the addon story

date: 2019-05-26 09:30:00
categories: emberjs roadmap
---

# From two directions: 2019 Ember.js Roadmap

The Ember.js community is once again embarking on an
open [Roadmap process](https://blog.emberjs.com/2019/05/20/ember-2019-roadmap-call-for-posts.html)
and I'm excited to participate this year. I'd like to focus on two very different needs I see
in our ecosystem today:

1. Attracting new users to single page from classic apps.
2. Flushing out the addon story

## From classic to single page apps

We should stop thinking about other
single page application frameworks as our competition. The vast majority of applications
on the web today are not built in javascript at all. Even if a team wants to make the
transition from classic to single page applications there is no guidance and very little
support for doing it. These are not "legacy" applications, they are actively maintained by
excellent developers on forward thinking teams, but are forced to choose another JS framework
because their onboarding story allows "sprinkling in" one component at a time.

A special section in the guides on integrating Ember.js into a classic
app could help interested developers become comfortable with both the technical process
and with the idea that the Ember.js community supported this use case.

Example Content:

1. How the Ember.js router will work within an existing app URL structure
   and ways development could be staged and put into production one route at a time.

2. What is the best loading experience for users when they are transitioning
   between the single page and classic app. What could be cached and how? Is there a way to pre-fetch
   ember resources or otherwise notify the browser that the SPA once parsed will be needed
   again very soon?

3. How to structure templates to duplicate the structure of the existing classic application
   to take advantage of existing styles and ensure a consistent user experience during a transition.

4. Advanced tools and techniques for large Ember.js apps to help migrators of fully formed
   classic applications make good early choices that are likely much different from a brand new
   single page application that would be expected to discover these options as the application
   grows to need them.

These changes to the guides would be largely symbolic, but as we gather converts we should
pay special attention to the rough edged and try and smooth them out as much as possible. Maybe
existing technologies and techniques can fill that roll, but if needed we should be ready to work with
browsers and TC39 as advocates for new additions to the web platform to make hybrid and transitional
applications a good experience for users and developers alike.

## Making addons easier to build well

[Addons](https://emberobserver.com/) are a huge part of what makes Ember.js amazing. They provide a single
step installation path to some incredible functionality. From full featured accessible dropdowns to
essential wrappers for handling asynchronous tasks there are ember addons for a huge range of problems,
but I think the number and variety of addons blinds us to some of the significant difficulties
developers face in their constructions and maintenance.

_In 2019 I'd like to see a focus on documenting and encouraging community patterns for addon development_

### Configuration

Take a look at any three addons and you're likely to see four ways they are configured by the applications
that consume them. Should global options be placed into the apps `environment.js` file? Or are they
more appropriately found in the `ember-cli-build.js` file? Should it be both? Would
an addon be better served creating it's own configuration standard
like `targets.js` or `ember-try.js`? Maybe the right way is a global service that
is overridden by the application to intercept and enhance configuration or options passed into
a component at invocation time. All of these patterns are in usage in popular addons and probably
a dozen more I'm forgetting or have never seen.

More guidance is needed for addon builders on the best way to provide overridable default configuration
in a way that is easy for application developers to use and standard across the community.

### Unexpected build situations

When new addons are generated they are provided with a "dummy app" for testing. This encourages
addon authors to think of their usage in the narrowest terms. For most addons this
might be enough, but as addons become popular they usually run into several problems.

#### 1. Nested Installs

The issue I see hit newly popular addons the most is being included as a dependency of another
addon or multiple levels of addons before being included in the app itself.

A [search for findHost](https://emberobserver.com/code-search?codeQuery=findHost&sort=score&sortAscending=false)
will turn up usage in hundreds of addons looking for a way to find their
containing application. And yet [\_findHost](https://ember-cli.com/api/classes/Addon.html#method__findHost)
is a private API.

#### 2. Engines and Yarn Workspaces

Ember.js is an incredible tool for very large applications in very large organizations. These
types of ambitious projects are often the first to reach for tools that make breaking up development
into smaller teams and more manageable units easier. Two of these tools [ember-engines](https://github.com/ember-engines/ember-engines)
and [Yarn Workspaces](https://yarnpkg.com/en/docs/workspaces) often cause difficult to
understand and resolve issues for addons.

#### What would help?

I think the addon blueprint needs to be changed substantially to surface these issues
immediately and testably.

In the same way [ember-try](https://github.com/ember-cli/ember-try) helps find,
fix, and report issues with different ember versions we need a tool to encourage best practices
in a variety of complicated installation scenarios _before_ they become hard to understand
bug reports. [ember-cli-addon-tests](https://github.com/tomdale/ember-cli-addon-tests) may
fill that roll, but would need to be part of the default blueprint to have a significant
impact on this problem.

### Dependency Management

Managing dependencies for javscript libraries is hard. It might not be any
more difficult for addon authors to manage, but it is certainly not any easier.
Addons come pre-installed with more than 20 dependencies upon generation and usually
require more of their own. This raises two issues.

#### 1. Blueprint Dependencies

What is the correct way to update dependencies that are part of the default blueprint?
Should authors rely on [ember-cli-update](https://github.com/ember-cli/ember-cli-update)
and wait until the blueprint is updated? Or should they allow a tool like
[dependabot](https://dependabot.com/) to keep these blueprint dependencies up to date?

#### 2. Addon Dependencies

What is the right way for addons to declare their own dependencies? Should they be
included in the `dependencies` section of the addon's own `package.json` or should they
be installed into the host app when the addon is installed? If they are installed
in the host app how should the app be notified when a new version is required?
If they are included in the addon's `dependencies` how should version conflicts be
handled when other addons or the app itself required the same package? Maybe the best
answer is to use [ember-auto-import](https://github.com/ef4/ember-auto-import) in which
case it should be added to the default blueprint and surfaced in documentation.

#### What would help?

The only thing I can think of is to reduce or eliminate blueprint dependencies.
Could addons which don't need any special versions of these dependencies
rely on a single `ember-cli-addon-dependencies` package which provides them?

I'm hoping the upcoming changes in [embroider](https://github.com/embroider-build/embroider)
will simplify some of the API for addon development, maybe we can change the dependency
management story as well.

### Ember-try more things

Testing against ember versions is only one part of the story for addons. I would
like to see the default blueprint updated to include tests for active versions of
`ember-cli` and (if needed) `ember-data` as well.

## Conclusion

Whew, that is a big list and certainly more than we can accomplish in a year! I'd
like to wrap it up with some thoughts:

These are hard problems I face as an Ember.js
developer because the easy problems are mostly solved. I think 2018 was an amazing
year for Ember.js and I have high hopes for 2019, 2020, and beyond. I think of Ember.js
as so much more than the code in the framework, it is a community that
believes in shared solutions and goals and I'm incredibly happy to be a part of
it. Thanks for reading this far and thanks for being part of what makes Ember.js great!

If you've seen these problems, or even better know a solution you can find me at
[@jrjohnson\_](https://twitter.com/jrjohnson_).
